## Keywords

-   Opportunity cost
-   _Economic_ profit & _accounting_ profit
-   Present value analysis
    -   Net present value
    -   Single future value
    -   Stream of future values
-   Marginal analysis
-   _Positive_ and _normative_ analysis

---

## Opportunity Cost

> [!definition] Opportunity Cost
> The opportunity cost of any item is whatever must be **given up** to obtain it.
> Consists of two components:
>
> -   Explicit cost: (accounting) cost of a resource
> -   Implicit cost: cost of giving up the best alternative use of that resource

---

## Profits

> [!definition] **Accounting** Profit
> Total amount of money taken in from sales (total revenue) minus the explicit costs of producing the goods or services sold.

$$ \boxed{\text{Accounting Profit} = \text{Total Revenue} - \text{Explicit Costs}} $$

> [!definition] **Economic** Profit
> Difference between total revenue and the **opportunity cost** of resources used.

$$
\begin{align*}
\boxed{\text{Economic Profit}} &= \boxed{\text{Total Revenue} - \text{Opportunity Cost}} \\
&= \text{Total Revenue} - \text{(Explicit Costs + Implicit Costs)} \\
&= \text{Accounting Profit} - \text{Implicit Costs}
\end{align*}
$$

---

## Market

> [!definition] Market
> The market is the place for the two sides (buyer and seller) to make transactions.

**Bargaining** is the process of arriving at a price and quantity for a good or service.
It is limited by three rivalries:

1. Consumer-producer rivalry
2. Consumer-consumer rivalry
3. Producer-producer rivalry

---

## Present Value Analysis

Often a gap exists between the time when costs are borne and benefits are received.

> [!definition] Present Value of a Single Future Value
> Given
>
> -   **Prevailing interest rate** $i$
> -   **Number of periods** $n$
> -   **Future value** $FV$
>
> The amount that would have to be invested today is the **present value** $PV$.

The present value reflects the difference between the **future value FV** and the **opportunity cost of waiting OCW**.

> [!formula] Present Value as Future Value minus Opportunity Cost of Waiting
> $$ \boxed{PV = FV - \text{OCW}} $$

### _Single_ future value

> [!formula] Present Value of a Single Future Value
> $$ \boxed{PV = \frac{FV}{(1+i)^n}} $$

### _Stream_ of future values

> [!formula] Present Value of a Stream of Future Values
>
> $$
> \boxed{PV = \sum_{t=1}^{n} \frac{FV_t}{(1+i)^t}}
> $$

### Net Present Value

The present value of the _income stream_ generated by a project, minus the current cost of the project.

> [!formula] Net Present Value
>
> $$
> \boxed{NPV = PV - C_0} = \sum_{t=1}^{n} \frac{FV_t}{(1+i)^t} - C_0
> $$
>
> Where $C_0$ is the current cost of the project.

---

## Marginal Analysis

-   $Q$ = control variable (e.g., quantity produced)
-   $B(Q)$ = total benefit
-   $C(Q)$ = total cost
-   $NB(Q)$ = net benefit

The manager's objective is to maximize the net benefits.

> [!formula] Net Benefit
> $$ \boxed{NB(Q) = B(Q) - C(Q)} $$

We use marginal analysis to maximize net benefits.

-   $MB(Q)$ = marginal benefit = $\frac{dB(Q)}{dQ}$
-   $MC(Q)$ = marginal cost = $\frac{dC(Q)}{dQ}$
-   $MNB(Q)$ = marginal net benefit = $\frac{dNB(Q)}{dQ}$

> [!formula] Marginal Net Benefit
> $$ \boxed{MNB(Q) = MB(Q) - MC(Q)} $$

> [!rule] Marginal Principle
> To **maximize net benefits** $NB(Q)$, a manager should increase the control variable $Q$ as long as the marginal net benefit $MNB(Q)$ is positive, and up to the point where $$\text{Maximum net benefits} \iff MNB(Q) = 0 \iff \boxed{MB(Q) = MC(Q)}$$

---

## Incremental Decisions

> [!definition] Incremental Revenues
> Additional revenues that stem from a yes-or-no decision.

> [!definition] Incremental Costs
> Additional costs that stem from a yes-or-no decision.

> [!rule] Incremental Decision Rule
>
> -   Thumbs up if $MB > MC$
> -   Thumbs down if $MB < MC$

---

## Positive and Normative Analysis

> [!definition] Positive Analysis
> Statements that describe the relationship of cause and effect.
> "What will be the **impact** **of** ...?"

> [!definition] Normative Analysis
> Analysis examining questions of what ought to be (= value judgments).
> "**Should** the government ...?"
